---
layout: post
title: Tech's Applications Are Really Endless Except...
---

Humans are solutionists by nature. We take pride in the fact that we can solve problems. And the bigger and more complex the problem, the more accomplished we feel. It is no wonder that social entrepreneurs are so revered in society; they come up with novel business ideas that solve a problem and can do something meaningful for the world. It is odd however, even astounding, to think that social entrepreneurs may not be doing as much good as we think they are. At the heart of the problem is the fact that these many of these so called social entrepreneurs, termed “heropreneurs” by Daniela Papi-Thornton, want to impact the world but do not truly understand the issues they are trying to solve, or worse, do not truly care. 

In Silicon Valley especially, there is a prevailing attitude that technology can solve anything. Labelled “technological solutionism” by Evgeny Morozov, complex social phenomena like politics, public health, education, and law enforcement are recast as “neatly defined problems with definite, computable solutions or as transparent and self-evident processes that can be easily optimized.” Part of this can be explained by the Dunning Kruger effect; everyone believes they are more capable than they actually are and often think the problems they know less about are easier to solve. As a result, the abilities of technology are overestimated and the difficulties involved in solving the real issues are understated. It is a problem when entrepreneurs make assumptions and simplifications and their products are reflective of that.

Let’s look at some specifics:

During the Ebola outbreak in 2014, many tech innovators aimed to create mobile technologies that could work to combat the virus, popularly known as mobile health or mHealth for short. These apps would keep track of patients, train health workers, speed up communication, and share/store data. For example, Airtel and the Red Cross collaborated on an informative text messaging system in Sierra Leone. In Guinea, a smartphone-based contact tracing system that utilized analytics and data visualization software was created by CommCare and Tableau. Even large companies like IBM got in on the action and launched a disease-mapping system to keep track of the virus. 

Upon further research, a study by the Journal of Family Medicine and Primary Care found that the effectiveness of mHealth was largely uncertain. These apps faced multiple challenges including technical challenges using the software, non-availability of mobile networks in some areas, hardware and software costs, absence of universally accepted data collecting standards, coordination among different organizations, data privacy concerns, and high illiteracy rates among some of the affected populations, which posed a barrier to the success of mobile-based efforts. Long list huh. So, it is unclear whether mHealth actually had any significant impact. In facing a dire crisis such as Ebola, time and money spent on a questionable solution is time and money taken away from saving dying patients.

Another example is Facebook’s Free Basics plan in India. They intended to bring internet access to those without access, especially in remote areas, and touted lofty goals such as creating “more than 100 million jobs” and bringing people out of poverty. It was to Facebook’s surprise that they faced strong opposition from the locals, who saw this as only a greedy company hoping to expand its base and therefore profits. In fact, 80% of those targeted by the Free Basics plan already had internet, strengthening the idea that perhaps there were ulterior motives. Exemplifying this viewpoint is a quote by technologist Anil Dash, who notes that Facebook’s approach “may be a fundamentally wrong structure for delivering these kinds of services because it doesn't empower people to create solutions for themselves that are culturally and contextually appropriate. What about pausing the Internet Basics effort and spending some time on a real effort to listen to Indian voices about what would help them have connectivity on their own terms, in a way they find acceptable?" 

Having a social mission does not insulate a business from the forces of capitalism. Any lapse in the planning, any flaw in the product or implementation, any oversight in the research can and will lead to failure.

I am not saying that tech does not have the ability to solve these social issues but rather that with more rigorous research, we can do a better job of addressing them. For technology that aims to truly be life-altering, we need more

## Let's look at a startup on the right track: ##

One Degree is a startup that uses technology to connect low-income families in the Bay Area with the resources they need to improve their lives. Low-income families have a tough time accessing information about the numerous government and non-profit services available to them and as a result, remain in a vicious cycle of ignorance and poverty. To me this is a noble goal, even heroic. There were many initial obstacles of course, including funding, leadership challenges, technical issues with their product, etc. However, One Degree has repeatedly shown that they can understand and adapt to better serve the needs of its users from hosting community outreach events, partnering with other nonprofits and social agencies, adding language options like Spanish, and continuously integrating new features. One of the most common requests they received from users was a way to apply for supportive or permanently affordable housing. So in 2015, One Degree launched a site called One Home that simplified the application process for affordable housing -- a solution that exemplifies the proactiveness, flexibility, and resourcefulness needed for true social innovation.

It is important to realize that if we become too limited by a single perspective, we can fail to see other potential avenues. Tech’s applications are endless but it should by no means be used in isolation. These are complex social-political issues that do not have a straightforward solution. Just like how the most valuable determinant in maternal mortality is not the amount of c-section training for nurses or better treatment of severe bleeding/infections, but the availability of transport to local hospitals. Just like how the key to education in developing countries is not just the amount of books or teachers, but rather the availability of electricity so students can study at night. The best way to use tech in solving complex social issues is to approach it from a variety of angles to get a more accurate understanding for a more practical solution. This includes listening to input from the local communities that are affected, as well as taking advice from experts of relevant fields. It’s “collective impact” with a focus on the local communities, an approach to making collaboration work across government, business, philanthropy, nonprofits, and citizens to achieve significant and lasting social change. The world cannot be understood without technology. But the world cannot be understood with technology alone.
